Decommission `Enum.values()` and replace it with `Enum.entries` (#284)
Kotlin/KEEP: proposals/enum-entries.md

### Decommission of `Enum.values()`

Enums have been existing since the very beginning of Kotlin, and since Java 1.5, released in 2004, meaning that the deprecation
of `values` using Kotlin's standard [deprecation cycle](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/kotlin-evolution.html#incompatible-changes) 
will create unnecessary disturbance in the ecosystem and will render a lot of already existing educational materials outdated.

To avoid that, `values()` will be softly decommissioned via IDE assistance:

* `values` will be de-prioritized and eventually removed from IDE auto-completion.
* Soft warning with an intention to replace call to `values()` with call to `entries` will be introduced.
* All the corresponding materials, such as Kotlin guides, J2K and tutorials will be adjusted to use `entries` API.
* Eventually, we are going to re-visit this decision and decide on the further deprecation of `values` API.

### `EnumEntries<E>` type

Effectively, `entries` represents an immutable list of enum entries and can be represented as type `List<E>`.
To have an ability to further extend Enum's API in a non-intrusive manner that does not involve code-generation

> for each enum, we expose a direct subtype of `List<E>` named `EnumEntries`.

Reviewer: Makes sense to quote its full signature `sealed interface EnumEntries<E : Enum<E>> : List<E>` and explain why it's sealed.

> All potential extensions, such as `valueOfOrNull(String)`, `hasValue(String)` can be implemented on the standard library

Reviewer 2: Thanks for this great proposal! Could we consider adding `valueOfOrNull(String)` as part/collateral of this instead of a followup? It would be great to have a standard centralized function from the start on the SDK to avoid each project having to define its own extension function and then at some point later having to replace those.
Rationale: https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-42619/Add-a-static-valueOfOrNull-method-to-Enums-similar-to-valueOf

Author: It will definitely not be part of the initial 1.8.0 because we do not know a proper solution for this problem, but I consider this a natural continuation of this KEEP.

We have two options:

* Invest more into static interfaces/static extensions (https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-11968/) and then introduce a bunch of convenience extensions on all enums, such as `valueOfOrNull` etc.
* Introduce extensions/members on the proposed `EnumEntries` interface. It is a piece of cake and can be added at any moment after this KEEP, but it has a downside of being a bit too verbose: instead of `MyEnum.valueOfOrNull` one has to write `MyEnum.entries.valueOfOrNull`. Such a solution cures the symptoms, not the disease (inability to extend enums statically), or at least can be considered as such.

Author: (The option "generate valueOfOrNull right into enum body like values/entries" is out of the question though as it bloats the code and is neither extensible nor future-proof for such a simple task)

Reviewer 3: It may be possible to get an `Enum` value by index or by name, defining: `operator EnumEntries.get(name: String) : E?'

```kotlin
MyEnum.entries[index]
MyEnum.entries[name]
```

Author: This is an interesting suggestion, written it down in the corresponding KT issue

Reviewer 2: @qwwdfsad thanks for the explanation and rationale :)
@fvasco I really like that suggestion as well!

### Naming alternatives

Various languages use different notations to refer to enumeration elements, making the naming choice especially hard. 

We have considered the following alternatives:

* `values` property. While being the most familiar one, it carries the burdens of the existing `values()` API:
  * It is easy to misspel it with `values()` and fall into the same trap.
  * Introduction of `values` property adds an unfixable method reference ambiguity for all the callers of `E::values`.
* Java language [refers](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se7/html/jls-8.html#jls-8.9.1) to enum elements as `constants`. 
  * The risks of introducing widely-used API named `constants` with the potential clashes with [Kotlin constant evaluation](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-14652) outweighs the benefits of the straightforward name.
* `valuesList` and `entryList` suffer the same disease -- excessive verbosity of the name.
* `components` is already reserved in Kotlin for positional deconstructors.
* Kotlin specification and documentation already refer to enum elements as entries, making it our final choice.

### Translation strategy for Kotlin enums

> For source-compiled enums, a new static property with a JVM signature `public static List<E> getEntries()` is added,

Reviewer 4: `List<E>` -> `EnumEntries<E>`

returning a pre-allocated immutable list of enum entries.

For the sake of compatibility with bytecode pre-processors and reflection usages that modify a backing array `$VALUES` field,
the generated bytecode for `values()` is left intact, and the resulting list of entries reads the underlying `$VALUES` lazily,
leaving the chance for existing bytecode preprocessors to change the array without dealing with list allocation.

#### Implementation note

A special type, `EnumEntriesList` is introduced to the standard library. The type has the only constructor
accepting the functional type with a signature `() -> Array<E>`. The corresponding lambda is generated
using the standard `invokedynamic` with `LambdaMetafactory`.

The final decompiled class for the enum
```kotlin
enum class MyEnum {
    A;
}
```

has the following form (all irrelevant parts omitted):
```java
enum MyEnum extends Enum<MyEnum> {
    private static final synthetic MyEnum[] $VALUES

>     private static final synthetic List<MyEnum> $ENTRIES;

Reviewer 4: `List<MyEnum>` -> `EnumEntries<MyEnum>`

   
    <clinit> {
        A = new MyEnum("A", 0);
        $VALUES = $values();
        Supplier<MyEnum[]> supplier = #invokedynamic ..args.. values;

>         $ENTRIES = new EnumEntriesList(supplier);

Reviewer: Now it's a call to the `enumEntries` function instead of the constructor of `EnumEntries`

    }

    public static MyEnum[] values() {
        return $VALUES.clone();
    }
  

>     public static List<MyEnum> getEntries() {

Reviewer 4: `List<MyEnum>` -> `EnumEntries<MyEnum>`

        return $ENTRIES;
    }

    private synthetic static MyEnum[] $values() {
        return new MyEnum[] { A };
    }
}
```

### Translation strategy for compiled Kotlin enums and Java enums

For already compiled Kotlin enums and Java enums, a separate synthetic mapping classfile will be introduced 
for each callsite of `Enum.entries`. The mapping class acts as a storage for a lazily-initialized and pre-allocated list of
enum entries.

## Risks and assumptions

The proposal has two main risks:

> The potential source-compatibility issue for `entries` property in the companion objects within a Enum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first is the potential source-compatibility issue for `entries` property in the companion object within an Enum.
```

After the implementation of the proposed change as is, the following existing code will change its behaviour:

```kotlin
enum class MyEnum {
    A;
    
    companion object {
        val entries: Any? = ...
    }
}

MyEnum.entries // <- member has a higher priority than a companion member
```

To mitigate that, a separate compiler-assistant deprecation cycle is introduced, along with the preservation of 

> the resolve to `entries` from companion object.

Reviewer: Quite unclear what is "preservation of the resolve".

Taking into account the additional deprecation cycle and non-trivial setup for the problem to reproduce, we do not 
consider it a serious threat to compatibility.

> The second risk is the education disturbance and a new name for developers to get familiar with -- `entries`, opposed to already well-known `values`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second risk is the education disturbance and a new name for developers to get familiar with — `entries`, opposed to already well-known `values`.
```

Reviewer: Or " ... familiar with, namely `entries`, opposed to ..."
